Heigh-ho!
An it be not four by the day,I'll be hanged.
Charles' wain is over the newchimney
and yet our horse not packed.
What, ostler!
I prithee, Tom, beat Cut'ssaddle.
Put a few flocks in the point.
The poor jade is wrung in thewithers out of all cess.
Peas and beans are as dank hereas a dog.
That's the next way to give poorjades the bots.
This house is turned upside downsince Robin Ostler died.
Poor fellow, he's never joyedsince the price of oats rose.
It was the death of him.
I think this be the mostvillainous house
in all London road for fleas.
I'm stung like a tench.
What, ostler!
Come away and be hanged!
Come away!
I've a gammon of bacon and tworazors of ginger,
to be delivered as far asCharing-cross.
God's body!
The turkeys in my pannier arequite starved.
Come, neighbour Mugs.
We'll call up the gentlemen.
They will along with company,for they have great charge.
What ho, chamberlain.
At hand, quoth pick-purse.
Good morrow, Master Peto.
It holds current that I told youyesternight.
There's a franklin in the wildof Kent
hath brought three hundred markswith him in gold.
I heard him tell it to one ofhis party
last night at supper, a kind ofauditor,
one that hath abundance ofcharge too, God knows what.
Here.
They're up already and call foreggs and butter.
They will away presently.
Sirrah, if they meet not withSaint Nicholas' clerks,
I'll give thee this neck.
Nay, I'll none of it.
I pray thee keep that for thehangman,
for I know thou worshippest St.Nicholas
as truly as a man of falsehoodmay.
What talkest thou to me of thehangman?
If I hang, I'll make a fat pairof gallows,
for if I hang, old Sir Johnhangs with me,
and thou knowest he's nostarveling.
Tut!
There are other Trojans thatthou dreamest not of,
the which for sport sake
are content to do the professionsome grace,
that would, if matters should belooked into,
for their own credit sake, makeall whole.
I'm joined with no foot-landrakers,
no long-staff sixpenny strikers,
none of your mad mustachiopurple-hued malt-worms
but with nobility andtranquility,
burgomasters and great oneyers.
Give me your hand.
Thou shalt have a share in ourpurchase,
as I am a true man.
Nay, rather let me have it, asthou art a false thief.
Come!
Shelter, shelter.
I have removed Falstaff's horse,
and he frets like a gummedvelvet.
Stand close.
Poins, and be hanged!
Poins!
Peace, ye fat-kidneyed rascal.
What a brawling dost thou keep.
Where's Poins, Hal?
He is walked up to the top ofthe hill.
I'll go seek him.
I'm accursed to rob.in thatthief's company.
The rascal hath removed my horseand tied him I know not where.
If I travel but four footfurther afoot,
I shall break my wind.
Poins, Hal!
A plague on you both!
Bardolph, Peto!
I'll starve ere I'll rob a footfurther.
Eight yards of uneven ground
is threescore and ten milesafoot with me,
and the stony-hearted villainsknow it well enough.
A plague upon it when thievescannot be true one to another.
A plague on you all.
Give me my horse, you rogues.
Give me my horse, and be hanged!
Peace, ye fat-guts!
Lie down.
Lay thine ear close to theground,
and list if thou canst hear thetread of travelers.
Have you any levers to lift meup again, being down?
'Sblood, I'll not bear my ownflesh so far afoot again
for all the coin in thy father'sexchequer.
What a plague mean ye to colt methus?
Thou liest.
Thou art not colted; thou artuncolted.
I prithee, good Prince Hal, helpme to my horse,
good king's son.
Out, ye rogue.
Shall I be your ostler?
Hang thyself in thine ownheir-apparent garters.
If I be ta'en, I'll peach forthis.
An I have not ballads made onyou all
and sung to filthy tunes, let acup of sack be my poison.
Stand!
So I do, against my will.
O, 'tis our setter.
I know his voice.
Bardolph, what news?
Case ye. Case ye.
On with your vizards.
There's money of the king'scoming down the hill.
'Tis going to the king'sexchequer.
You lie, ye rogue.
'Tis going to the king's tavern.
There's enough to make us all.
To be hanged.
Sirs, you three shall front themin the narrow lane.
Ned Poins and I will walk lower.
If they 'scape from yourencounter,
then they light on us.
How many be there of them?
Some eight or ten.
'Zounds, will they not rob us?
What, a coward, Sir John Paunch?
Indeed, I'm not John of Gaunt,your grandfather,
but yet no coward, Hal.
I'll leave that to the proof.
Sirrah Jack, thy horse standsbehind the hedge.
When thou needest him, therethou shalt find him.
Now cannot I strike him, if Ishould be hanged.
Ned, where are our disguises?
Here, hard by.
Stand close.
Now, my masters, happy man behis dole, say I.
Every man to his business.
Strike!
Down with them!
Cut the villains' throats!
Ay, whoreson caterpillars!
Bacon-fed knaves!
They hate us youth!
Down with them!
Now, my masters, let us to horsebefore day.
An the Prince and Poins be nottwo arrant cowards,
there's no equity stirring.
There's no more valor in thatPoins
than in a wild duck.
Got with much ease.
Falstaff sweats to death.
He lards the lean earth as hewalks along.
Were 't not for laughing, Iwould pity him.
Ooh, how the fat rogue roar'd.
"But for mine own part, my lord,
"I could be well contented to bethere,
in respect of the love I bearyour house."
He could be contented?
Why is he not, then?
In respect of the love he bearsour house,
he shows in this he loves hisown barn better
than he loves our house.
Let me see some more.
"The purpose you undertake isdangerous."
Why, that's certain.
'Tis dangerous to take a cold,to sleep, to drink.
But I tell you, my lord fool,out of this nettle, danger,
we pluck this flower, safety.
"The purpose you undertake isdangerous,
"the friends you have nameduncertain,
"the time itself unsorted, andyour whole plot too light
for the counterpoise of so greatan opposition."
Say you so? Say you so?
I say unto you again,
you're a shallow, cowardly hind,and you lie.
What a lack-brain is this!
By the Lord, our plot is a goodplot as ever was laid,
our friends true and constant.
A good plot, good friends, andfull of expectation.
An excellent plot, very goodfriends.
What a frosty-spirited rogue isthis.
Why, my lord of York commendsthe plot
and the general course of theaction.
'Zounds, an I were now by thisrascal,
I could brain him with hislady's fan.
Is there not my father, myuncle, and myself?
Lord Edmund Mortimer, my lord ofYork,
and Owen Glendower?
Is there not besides theDouglas?
Have I not all their letters tomeet me in arms
by the ninth of the next month?
And are they not some of themset forward already?
What a pagan rascal is this!
An infidel!
Ha!
You shall see now,
out of very sincerity of fearand cold heart
will he to the king
and lay open all ourproceedings.
Oh, I could divide myself and goto buffets
for moving such a dish of skimmilk
with so honorable an action!
Hang him!
Let him tell the king.
We are prepared.
I will set forward tonight.
How now, Kate.
I must leave you within thesetwo hours.
My good lord, why are you thusalone?
For what offense have I thisfortnight been
a banish'd woman from my Harry'sbed?
Tell me, sweet lord,
what is't that takes from theethy stomach, pleasure,
and thy golden sleep?
Why dost thou bend thine eyesupon the earth
and start so often when thousit'st alone?
Why hast thou lost the freshblood in thy cheeks
and given my treasures and myrights of thee
to thick-eyed musing and cursedmelancholy?
In thy faint slumbers, I by theehave watch'd
and heard thee murmur tales ofiron wars,
speak terms of manage to thybounding steed,
cry "Courage!
To the field!"
And thou hast talk'd of salliesand retires,
of trenches, tents,
of palisadoes, frontiers,parapets,
of basilisks, of cannon,culverin,
of prisoners' ransom and ofsoldiers slain
and all the currents of a headyfight.
Thy spirit within thee hath beenso at war
and thus hath so bestirr'd theein thy sleep
that beads of sweat have stoodupon thy brow
like bubbles in a late-disturbedstream.
And in thy face, strange motionshave appear'd
such as we see when men restraintheir breath
on some great sudden hest.
Oh, what portents are these?
Some heavy business hath my lordin hand,
and I must know it, else heloves me not.
What, ho!
Is Gilliams with the packetgone?
He is, my lord, an hour ago.
Hath Butler brought those horsesfrom the sheriff?
One horse, my lord, he broughteven now.
What horse?
A roan, a crop-ear, is it not?
It is, my lord.
That roan shall be my throne.
Well, I will back him straight.
O esperance!
But hear you, my lord.
What say'st thou, my lady?
What is it carries you away?
Why, my horse, my love, myhorse.
Out, you mad-headed ape!
A weasel hath not such a deal ofspleen
as you are toss'd with.
In faith, I'll know thybusiness, Harry,
that I will.
I fear my brother Mortimer dothstir about his title
and hath sent for you to linehis enterprise.
But if you go--
So far afoot, I shall be weary,love.
Oh, come, come, you paraquito.
Answer me directly unto thisquestion that I ask.
In faith, I'll break thy littlefinger, Harry,
an if thou wilt not tell me allthings true.
Ah!
Away.
Away, you trifler!
Love!
I love thee not.
I care not for thee, Kate.
This is no world to play withmammets
and to tilt with lips.
We must have bloody noses andcrack'd crowns
and pass them current too.
God's me, my horse!
What say'st thou, Kate?
What would'st thou have of me?
Do you not love me?
Do you not, indeed?
Well, do not then, for since youlove me not,
I will not love myself.
Do you not love me?
Nay, tell me if you speak injest or no.
Come.
Will you see me ride?
And when I am on horseback,
I will swear I love theeinfinitely.
But hark you, Kate.
I must not have you henceforthquestion me
whither I go, nor reasonwhereabout.
Whither I must, I must, and, toconclude,
this evening must I leave you,gentle Kate.
I know you're wise
but yet no farther wise thanHarry Percy's wife.
Constant you are but yet awoman.
And for secrecy, no lady closer,for I well believe
thou wilt not utter what thoudost not know.
And so far will I trust thee,gentle Kate.
How, so far?
Not an inch further.
But hark you, Kate.
Whither I go, thither shall yougo too.
Today will I set forth, tomorrowyou.
Will this content you, Kate?
It must, of force.
Ned, prithee, come out of thatfat room,
and lend me thy hand to laugh alittle.
Where hast been, Hal?
With three or four loggerheads
amongst three or four scorehogsheads.
I have sounded the verybase-string of humility.
Sirrah, I am sworn brother to aleash of drawers
and can call them all by theirchristen names,
as Tom, Dick, and Francis.
They take it already upon theirsalvation
that though I be prince of Walesyet,
I am king of courtesy and tellme flatly
I'm no proud Jack, likeFalstaff,
but a Corinthian, a lad ofmettle, a good boy,
by the Lord, so they call me.
And when I'm king of England,
I shall command all the goodlads in Eastcheap.
Old Sir John and and a few dozenmore
are at the door.
Shall I let them in?
Let them alone awhile.
I am now of all humors
that have showed themselveshumors
since the old days of goodmanAdam
to the pupil age of this presenttwelve o'clock at midnight.
I am not yet of Percy's mind,the Hotspur of the north,
he that kills me
some six or seven dozen Scots ata breakfast,
washes his hands, and says tohis wife.
"Fie upon this quiet life!
I want work."
"Oh, my sweet Harry," says she,
"how many hast thou killedtoday?"
"Give my roan horse a drench,"says he
and answers "some fourteen" anhour after.
"A trifle, a trifle."
I prithee, call in Falstaff.
I'll play Percy,
and that damned brawn shall playDame Mortimer his wife.
Falstaff!
"Rivo," says the drunkard!
Call in ribs! Call in tallow!
Welcome, Jack.
Where hast thou been?
A plague of all cowards, I say,and a vengeance too.
Marry, and amen.
Give me a cup of sack, boy.
Ere I lead this life long,
I'll sew nether stocks and mendthem and foot them too.
A plague of all cowards.
Give me a cup of sack, rogue!
Is there no virtue extant?
Didst thou never see Titan kissa dish of butter?
Pitiful-hearted Titan,
that melted at the sweet tale ofthe sun's.
If thou didst, then behold thatcompound.
You rogue!
There's lime in this sack too.
There's nothing but roguery tobe found in villainous man.
But a coward is worse than a cupof sack with lime in it.
A villainous coward.
"Go thy ways, old Jack.
Die when thou wilt."
If manhood, good manhood,
be not forgot upon the face ofthe earth,
then am I a shotten herring.
There lives not three good menunhanged in England,
and one of them is fat and growsold.
God help the while.
A bad world, I say.
I would I were a weaver; I couldsing psalms or anything.
A plague of all cowards, I saystill.
How now, wool-sack.
What mutter you?
A king's son!
Oh, if I do not beat thee out ofthy kingdom
with a dagger of lath and driveall thy subjects
afore thee like a flock of wildgeese,
I'll never wear hair on my facemore.
You Prince of Wales!
Why, you whoreson round man,what's the matter?
Are not you a coward?
Answer me that.
And Poins there?
'Zounds, ye fat paunch.
Ye call me a coward.
By the Lord, I'll stab thee.
I, call thee coward?
I'll see thee damned ere I callthee coward.
But I'd give a thousand pounds
I could run as fast as thoucanst.
You're straight enough in theshoulders,
you care not who sees your back.
Call you that backing of yourfriends?
A plague upon such backing!
Give me them that will face me.
Give me a cup of sack!
I'm a rogue, if I drunk today.
Come on, come on, come on, comeon.
Oh, villain.
Thy lips are scarce wiped sincethou drunkest last.
All's one for that.
A plague of all cowards, I saystill.
What's the matter?
There be three of us here
have ta'en a thousand pound thisday morning.
Where is it, Jack? Where is it?
Where is it?
Ta'en from us it is, a hundredupon poor three of us.
What, a hundred?
I am a villain
if I was not at half-sword
with a dozen of them two hourstogether.
I have 'scaped by miracle.
I am eight times thrust throughthe doublet,
four through the hose,
my buckler cut through andthrough,
my sword hacked like a hand-saw.
Ecce signum.
I never dealt better since I wasa man.
All would not do.
A plague of all cowards.
Let them speak.
If they speak more or less thantruth,
they are villains and the sonsof darkness.
Speak, sirs. How was it?
We three set up some dozen--
Sixteen at least, my lord, andbound them.
No, no, they were not bound.
They were bound, every one ofthem,
or I'm a Jew else, an Ebrew Jew.
As we were sharing,
some six or seven fresh men setupon us--
And unbound the rest, and thencome in the other.
What, fought you with them all?
All?
I know not what you call "all."
But if I fought not with fiftyof them,
then am I a bunch of radish.
If there were not two or threeand fifty on poor old Jack,
then am I no two-leggedcreature.
Pray God you have not murderedsome of them.
Oh, no, that's past praying for.
I have peppered two of them.
Two, I am sure I have paid, tworogues in buckram suits.
I tell thee what, Hal.
If I tell thee a lie, spit in myface, call me horse.
Thou knowest my old ward.
Here I lay.
Thus I bore my point.
Four rogues in buckram let driveat me--
What, four? Thou saidst but twoeven now.
Four, Hal.
I told thee four.
Ay, ay, he said four.
These four came all a-front andmainly thrust at me.
I made me no more ado
but took all their seven pointsin my target, thus.
Seven? Why, there were but foureven now.
In buckram?
Ay, four in buckram suits.
Seven, by these hilts,
or I'm a villain else.
Prithee, let him alone. We shallhave more anon.
Dost thou hear, Hal?
Ay, and mark thee too, Jack.
Do so, for it is worth thelistening to.
These nine in buckram that Itold thee of--
So two more already.
Their points being broken--
Down fell their hose.
Began to give me ground.
But I followed me close, came infoot and hand.
And with a thought, seven of theeleven I paid.
O monstrous!
Eleven buckram men grown out oftwo!
But, as ill luck would have it,
three misbegotten knaves inKendal green
came at my back and let drive atme,
for it was so dark, Hal,
thou couldst not see thy hand.
These lies are like their fatherthat begets them:
gross as a mountain, open,palpable.
Why, thou clay-brained guts,thou knotty-pated fool,
thou whoreson, obscene, greasytallow-catch.
What, art thou mad? Art thoumad?
Is not the truth the truth?
Why, how couldst thou know thesemen in Kendal green
when it was so dark thou couldstnot see thy hand?
Come, tell us your reason.
What sayest thou to this?
Come, your reason, Jack.
Your reason.
What, upon compulsion?
'Zounds, an I were at thestrappado
or all the racks in the world
I would not tell you oncompulsion.
Give you a reason on compulsion?
If reasons were as plentiful asblackberries,
I would give no man a reasonupon compulsion, I.
I'll be no longer guilty of thissin.
This sanguine coward, thisbed-presser,
this horseback-breaker, thishuge hill of flesh--
'Sblood, you starveling, youelf-skin,
you dried neat's tongue, youbull's pizzle,
you stock-fish!
O for breath to utter what islike thee!
You tailor's-yard, you sheath,you bowcase,
you vile standing-tuck--
Breathe awhile, and then do itagain.
And when thou hast tired thyselfin base comparisons,
hear me speak but this.
Mark, Jack.
We two saw you three set on four
and were masters of theirwealth.
Mark now, how a plain tale shallput you down.
Then did we two set on you three
and, with a word, out-faced youfrom your prize
and have it.
Yea, and can show it you here inthe house.
And, Falstaff, you carried yourguts away as nimbly
with as quick dexterity,
and roared for mercy and stillrun and roared
as ever I heard bull-calf.
What a slave art thou, to hackthy sword
as thou hast done and then sayit was in fight.
What trick, what device, whatstarting-hole
canst thou now find out to hidethee
from this open and apparentshame?
Come, Jack.
What trick hast thou now?
By the Lord, I knew ye as wellas he that made ye.
Why, hear you, my masters.
Was it for me to kill theheir-apparent?
Should I turn upon the trueprince?
Why, thou knowest I'm as valiantas Hercules.
But beware instinct.
The lion will not touch the trueprince.
Instinct is a great matter.
I was now a coward uponinstinct.
I shall think the better ofmyself and thee during my life:
I for a valiant lion, thou for atrue prince.
But, by the Lord, lads, I'm gladyou have the money.
Hostess, clap to the doors!
Watch today. Pray to-morrow.
Gallants, lads, boys, hearts ofgold,
all the titles of goodfellowship come to you.
What, shall we be merry?
Shall we have a play extempore?
Content, and the argument shallbe thy running away.
No more of that, an thou lovestme!
My lord the prince!
How now, my lady the hostess.
What sayest thou to me?
Marry, my lord, a nobleman ofthe court is at door,
would speak with you.
He says he comes from yourfather.
Give him as much as will makehim a royal man,
and send him back again to mymother.
-What manner of man is he? -Anold man.
What doth gravity out of his bedat midnight?
Shall I give him,his answer?
Prithee, do, Jack.
'Faith, and I'll send himpacking.
Now, sirs, by our lady, youfought fair, Peto.
So did you, Bardolph.
You are lions too.
You ran away upon instinct,would not touch the true prince.
No, fie!
I ran when I saw others run.
'Faith, tell me now in earnest,
how came Falstaff's sword sohacked?
Why, he hacked it with hisdagger
and said he would swear truthout of England
but he would make you believe itwas done in fight
and persuaded us to do the like.
Yea, and to tickle our noseswith spear-grass
to make them bleed
and then to beslubber ourgarments with it
and swear it was the blood oftrue men.
I did what I did not this sevenyear before.
I blushed to hear his monstrousdevices.
Villain, thou stolest a cup ofsack eighteen years ago
and wert taken with the manner,
and ever since, thou hastblushed extempore.
Here comes lean Jack. Here comesbare-bone.
How now, my sweet creature ofbombast!
How long is't ago, Jack,
since thou saw thine own knee?
My own knee?
When I was about thy years, Hal,
I was not an eagle's talon inthe waist.
I could have crept into anyalderman's thumb-ring.
A plague of sighing and grief;
it blows a man up like abladder.
Now, shush, shush, shush.
There's villainous news abroad.
Here was Sir John Bracy fromyour father.
You must to the court in themorning.
That same mad fellow of thenorth, Percy,
and he of Wales that gave Amamonthe bastinado
and made Lucifer cuckold andswore the devil
his true liegeman upon the crossof a Welsh hook--
what a plague call you him?
Oh, Glendower.
Owen, Owen, the same.
And his son-in-law Mortimer andold Northumberland
and that sprightly Scot ofScots, Douglas,
he that runs o' horseback up ahill perpendicular--
He that rides at high speed
and with his pistol kills,asparrow flying.
You've hit it.
So did he never the sparrow.
Well, there's good mettle inthat fellow.
He will not run.
Why, what a rascal art thou then
to praise him so for running.
O' horseback, ye cuckoo.
But afoot, he will not budge afoot.
Yes, Jack, upon instinct.
Well, I grant ye, upon instinct.
Well, he is there too and oneMordake
and a thousand blue-caps more.
Worcester is stolen awaytonight.
Your father's beard is turnedwhite at the news.
You may buy land now as cheap asstinking mackerel.
Why, then, it is like, if therecome a hot June,
we shall buy maidenheads as theybuy hob-nails:
by the hundreds.
Oh, by the mass, thou sayesttrue, lad.
It is like we shall have goodtrading that way.
But tell me, Hal, art not thouhorrible afeard?
Thou being heir-apparent, couldthe world pick thee out
three such enemies again as thatfiend Douglas,
that spirit Percy, and thatdevil Glendower?
Art thou not horribly afraid?
Doth not thy blood thrill at it?
Not a whit, i' faith.
I lack some of thy instinct.
Well, thou wert be horribly chidtomorrow
when thou comest to thy father.
An thou love me, practice ananswer.
Do thou stand for my father
and examine me upon theparticulars of my life.
Oh, uh, shall I?
Yes!
Content.
Come on, come on, come on.
This chair shall be my state,this dagger my scepter,
and this cushion my crown.
Give me a cup of sack to make myeyes look red,
that it may be thought I havewept.
Stand aside, nobility.
O Jesu, this is excellent sport,i' faith!
Weep not, sweet queen...
for trickling tears are vain.
O, the father, see how he holdshis countenance!
For God's sake, lords, convey mytristful queen.
For tears do stop theflood-gates of her eyes.
O Jesu, he doth it as like one
of these harlotry players asever I see.
Peace, good pint-pot.
Peace, good tickle-brain.
Harry.
Ah, yea.
I do not only marvel where thouspendest thy time
but also how thou artaccompanied.
There is a thing, Harry, whichthou hast often heard of,
and it is known to many in thisland by the name of pitch.
This pitch, as ancient writersdo report,
doth defile.
So doth the company thoukeepest.
Harry, I do not speak to thee indrink but in tears,
not in pleasure but in passion,
not in words only but in woesalso.
And yet there is a virtuous man
whom I have often noted in thycompany,
but I know not his name.
What manner of man, an it likeyour majesty?
A goodly, portly man, i' faith,and a corpulent,
of a cheerful look, a pleasingeye,
and a most noble carriage.
And, as I think, his age somefifty,
or, by'r lady, inclining tothree score.
And now I remember me; his nameis...
Falstaff.
If that man should be lewdlygiven,
he deceiveth me,
for, Harry, I see virtue in hislooks.
If then the tree shall be knownby the fruit,
as the fruit by the tree, then,peremptorily I speak it,
there is virtue in thatFalstaff.
Him, keep with. The rest,banish.
And now tell me, thou naughtyvarlet,
tell me, where hast thou beenthis month?
Dost thou speak like a king?
Do thou stand for me, and I'llplay my father.
What?
Depose me?
Yea!
If thou dost it half so gravely,so majestically,
both in word and matter, hang meup by the heels
for a rabbit-sucker or apoulter's hare.
Here I am set.
And here I stand. Now judge, mymasters.
Now, Harry, whence come you?
My noble lord, from Eastcheap.
The complaints I hear of theeare grievous.
'Sblood, my lord, they're false.
Nay, I'll tickle ye for a youngprince, i' faith.
Swearest thou, ungracious boy?
Henceforth, ne'er look on me.
Thou art violently carried awayfrom grace.
There is a devil haunts thee
in the likeness of an old, fatman.
A tun of man is thy companion.
Why dost thou converse with thattrunk of humors,
that bolting-hutch ofbeastliness,
that swollen parcel of dropsies,that huge bombard of sack,
that stuffed cloak-bag of guts,
that roasted Manningtree ox withthe pudding in his belly,
that reverend vice, that grayiniquity,
that father ruffian, that vanityin years?
Wherein is he good, but to tastesack and drink it?
Wherein neat and cleanly, but tocarve a capon and eat it?
Wherein cunning, but in craft?
Wherein crafty, but in villainy?
Wherein villainous, but in allthings?
Wherein worthy, but in nothing?
I would your grace would take mewith you.
Whom means your grace?
That villainous abominablemisleader of youth, Falstaff,
that old, white-bearded Satan.
Well, my lord, the man, I know.
I know thou dost.
But to say that I know more harmin him than in myself
were to say more than I know.
That he is old, the more thepity,
his white hairs do witness it.
But that he is, saving yourreverence,
a whoremaster, that, I utterlydeny.
If sack and sugar be a fault,God help the wicked.
If to be old and merry be a sin,
then many an old host that Iknow is damned.
If to be fat be to be hated,
then Pharaoh's lean kine are tobe loved.
No, my good lord.
Banish Peto.
Banish Bardolph.
Banish Poins.
But for sweet Jack Falstaff,kind Jack Falstaff,
true Jack Falstaff, valiant JackFalstaff,
and therefore more valiant,being, as he is,
old Jack Falstaff,
banish not him thy Harry'scompany.
Banish not him thy Harry'scompany.
Banish plump Jack, and banishall the world.
I do.
I will.
My lord! My lord!
The sheriff, with a mostmonstrous watch,
is at the door.
Out, ye rogue!
Play out the play.
I have much to say in the behalfof that Falstaff.
O Jesu, my lord, my lord.
Heigh, the devil rides on afiddlestick.
What's the matter?
The sheriff and all the watchare at the door.
They are come to search thehouse.
Shall I let them in?
Dost thou hear, Hal?
Never call a true piece of golda counterfeit.
Thou art essentially mad,without seeming so.
And thou a natural cowardwithout instinct.
I deny your major.
If you will deny the sheriff,so.
If not, let him enter.
If I become not a cart as wellas another man,
a plague upon my bringing up.
I hope I shall be as soonstrangled with a halter asanother.
Go hide thee behind the arras.
The rest walk up above.
Now, my masters, for a good faceand a true conscience.
Both which I have had, but theirdate is out,
and therefore I'll hide me.
Call in the sheriff.
Now, master sheriff, what isyour will with me?
First, pardon me, my lord.
A hue and cry hath follow'dseveral men unto this house.
What men?
One of them is well known, mygracious lord,
a gross, fat man.
As fat as butter.
The man, I do assure you, is nothere,
for I myself at this time haveemploy'd him.
And, sheriff, I will engage myword to thee
that I will, by dinnertimetomorrow,
send him to answer thee, or anyman,
for any thing he shall becharged withal.
And so let me entreat you leavethe house.
I will, my lord.
There are two gentlemen
have in this robbery lost threehundred marks.
It may be so.
If he have robb'd these men, heshall be answerable.
And so farewell.
Good night, my noble lord.
I think it is good morrow, is itnot?
Indeed, my lord, methinks it betwo o'clock.
This oily rascal is known aswell as Paul's.
Go, call him forth.
Falstaff!
Behind the arras, and snortinglike a horse.
Hark, how hard he fetchesbreath.
Search his pockets.
What hast thou found?
Nothing but papers, my lord.
Let's see what they be. Readthem.
"Item, a capon, 2s2d.
"Item, sauce, 4d.
"Item, sack, two gallons, 5s8d.
"Item, anchovies and sack aftersupper, 2s6d.
Item, bread, ha'penny."
Oh, monstrous.
But one ha'penny-worth of bread
to this intolerable deal ofsack.
What there is else, keep close.
We'll read it at more advantage.
There let him sleep till day.
I'll to the court in themorning.
We must all to the wars,
and thy place shall behonorable.
I'll procure this fat rogue acharge of foot.
And I know his death will be amarch of twelve-score.
The money shall be paid backagain with advantage.
Be with me betimes in themorning.
And so good morrow, Ned.
Good morrow, good my lord.